[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
sally nugent and dan walker our
headlines for you today a warning that a
new strain of coronavirus could be
linked to a rise in infections
as millions face tighter restrictions
from midnight
greenwich council wants which wants to
close schools because of covetous order
to keep them open or
face legal action as sport in london
moves back behind closed doors the
chelsea manager frank lampard says
football's proved it can keep
fans safe he's urging the government to
make the game exempt from restrictions
and allow
some supporters into stadiums good
morning how many more jobs have been
lost
later we get the latest unemployment
figures as businesses struggle to work
out who they can afford to keep on
a year on we catch up with terence he is
no longer lonely
he's even making tick-tock videos with
his new friends
good morning it's a slightly cooler day
today than it was yesterday there'll be
a lot of dry weather fair bit of
sunshine
some showers especially in the west and
the winds will be a bit lighter
i'll have all the details though in
about 10 minutes
good morning it is tuesday the 15th of
december our top story
almost 11 million people in london and
parts of essex and hertfordshire
will face tougher coronavirus
restrictions from midnight
this comes after the health secretary
announced that a new strain of the virus
had been identified which could explain
the increase in infection rate in parts
of the south of england john donason has
more
for many christmas cheer is in short
supply this year
the new tier three measures for greater
london and parts of
essex and hertfordshire mean that from
midnight tonight
some 34 million people in england will
be living
under the highest level of restrictions
i recognize um the problems that's going
to cause hospitality and other
businesses and effect on mental health
uh for a lot of people as well but i
think unfortunately it is the right
decision
and i think that the in the end taking
it earlier rather than waiting to do it
on saturday
is probably also going to prove to be
the right decision
the health secretary matt hancock told
the house of commons
that in some areas of the south east the
number of cases was now doubling every
seven days
we've seen early action can help prevent
more damaging and longer lasting
problems later
mr speaker these restrictions will come
into force at midnight
on wednesday morning because when the
virus moves quickly
we must move quickly too and we must
take the actions that are not
necessarily easy
but are effective
and there's also concern about a new
possibly faster spreading variant of the
virus
that has emerged government scientists
at the porton down laboratories in
wiltshire
are now trying to find out whether the
new strain will have a different
response to vaccines
although they say at this stage there's
no reason to think it will
for the hospitality industry the new
restrictions in london and the south
east are another huge blow just two
weeks after reopening after a second
national lockdown
pubs bars and restaurants will be forced
to close again
unless they offer takeaway service only
under tier 3 cinemas and theaters will
also have to close their doors
but the government says plans to ease
restrictions for five days over
christmas
will go ahead john donason bbc news
well the hospitality industry is warning
that london's move into tier three will
put
thousands of jobs at risk tim muffet is
at a restaurant in central london for us
this morning tim these are incredibly
challenging times aren't they
yeah good morning to you from hoban
dining room now this time of year this
place will be gearing up for its busiest
time of the year christmas parties
christmas shoppers well from midnight
tonight
that's all going to stop for the time
being as we heard
all of london parts of essex and
hertfordshire moving
in to tier three so restaurants bars and
cafes will have to close unless they
offer takeaways there'll also be no
mixing between households in
in houses or in private gardens although
that can still
carry on in groups of six in say a
public park for example so huge changes
now of course many parts of england have
lived under these restrictions
for quite some time but from midnight
tonight an additional 11 million or so
people
will be moving into tier 3. it's not
just hospitality in london especially
theaters and cinemas are going to be
very very badly hit some
theater shows had only just reopened and
now they've faced
closing again there are real concerns
about the impact
on that so as you say for the jobs in
the hospitality sector it is a
very very worrying time this always was
going to be
a very very tough christmas from
midnight tonight
it's going to get even tougher tim thank
you
the greenwich council has until 10
o'clock tonight uh this morning actually
sorry
um to withdraw its request for schools
to move teaching online or face
legal action from the government the
leader of the borough wrote to all head
teachers
in the area advising them to shut from
this evening
education secretary said using legal
powers is a last resort
london's mayor sadiq khan said closing
schools was the right thing to do
if you can't keep these schools closely
safe in the last few days before
christmas
it's better to earn the side of caution
and revert to online teaching for these
few days make the schools uh covey
secure over christmas so in january
they can reopen we can be confident that
kids aren't catching the virus and pass
them on to their parents
and across london and we'll be speaking
to sadiq khan live on the programme
about 10 past eight this morning isn't
it it's half
it's half no it's ten past eight it's
semper state right ten per state see
that good job we know what's going on
meanwhile the netherlands has announced
a five-week lockdown over christmas
the country's toughest coronavirus
restrictions to date
from today non-essential shops cinemas
and museums will close while cafes and
restaurants will be restricted to a
takeaway service
protest as you can see there stood
outside the prime minister's office last
night making noise as he made the
announcement
live on national television
technology giants like google and
facebook could face multi-million pound
fines if they fail to protect children
from online harm
under new proposals communication
regulator ofcom is set to gain the power
to block
access to online services that don't do
enough to protect users
he's our media editor amol rajan
after years of debate about how to curb
online harms while promoting the
benefits of digital technology
the government has finally published a
plan the regulator ofcom will have a
range of new powers
the likes of facebook or google could
face fines of up to 18 million pounds
or 10 of global turnover whichever is
higher
a new legal duty of care is intended to
protect children from grooming
bullying or pornography there are
already laws banning sexual abuse
terrorist material and some
suicide content but these will now be
enforced more strongly
the chief executive of the children's
charity the nspcc
gave a cautious welcome there are
serious crimes being
committed against children every single
day
um so this uh legislation hasn't come
a moment too soon at the same time
um bad regulation is worse than
um no regulation so it's important
that the government's proposals are now
properly scrutinized
a fortnight ago a digital markets unit
was announced to curb the monopolistic
tendencies
of big tech these measures aim to
mitigate social
rather than economic ills a new compact
between democracy and the data giants
is hesitantly emerging amal rajan bbc
news
joe biden has been confirmed as the next
president of the united states after the
influential electoral college cast their
votes
speaking after the announcement mr biden
said the will of the people prevailed
our north america correspondent david
willis reports
for joseph r biden of delaware a
democrat
eyes 55 knows zero
the moment joe biden formally became
this country's president-elect
california's electors awarding him the
votes he needed
to clear the 270th threshold in
america's electoral college
and having held off condemning donald
trump's unprecedented attempts to
overturn the election result
now was the time to hit back the flame
of democracy was
lit in this nation a long time ago and
we now know
nothing not even a pandemic or an abuse
of power
can extinguish that flame donald trump
had warned that certifying the votes
would amount to a severely punishable
crime
in the light of what he claims was
widespread voter fraud
but the claims are unsubstantiated and
courts across the country
have failed to support them as as this
man the attorney general bill barr
it's now been announced that mr barr
will be stepping down
bill said the president in a tweet will
be leaving just before christmas
to spend the holidays with his family
all this
on a bittersweet day as frontline
healthcare workers became the first in
the country to receive the coronavirus
vaccine
at a time when many here have misgivings
about its safety
it's no different than the majority of
vaccines that you get on a yearly basis
that we give to our children that we've
been getting since the 60s
and at the end of the day when we're
worried about side effects really the
truth is that everything has side
effects
this has been shown to be safe it's
effective and really it's the best route
for us to combat this horrible pandemic
but the most ambitious vaccination
program in u.s history
couldn't come soon enough as these
crates were being unpacked
came the news that the country had
passed another grim milestone
300 000 deaths from the coronavirus
david willis bbc news los angeles
there was a rare treat for stargazers
overnight last night
thankfully the cloud stayed away and
there was a total
solar eclipse don't stare at it have a
cardboard box or something
i think you're relatively safe to have a
quick look on the telly
you one slight snag with this you had to
be in argentina or chile to see it
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with bbc dot co dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news